-33004/99 REGD. No. D. L.-33004/99
xxxGIDExxx
EXTRAORDINARY
III 4
PART III Section 4
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY
. 518] , , 27, 1 5, 3
No. 518] NEW DELHI, WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 27, 2021/KARTIKA 5, 1943
, 11 ,
-25/6 - , , 2019
(2019 35) 104 - 2) 13 3)
, - , , -
1. (1)
, 2021
(2)
2. (1) , , -
( , 2019 (2019 35) ;
( 10
;
( 10 - 2)
;
6222 GI/2021 (1)
2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART III SEC.4]
( , 2019 15 - 2)
, ,
;
( , ,
;
(2) ,
,
3. -
, , , , , ,
, , , , , ,
, ,
4.
5. ,
(1) -I
(2) , -II
6.
-II
7. -
- ,
8. (1) -
-
(2) ,
, ,
(3) , , ,
, ,
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7) , - -
,
(8) ,
- -
[ III 4] 3
9. (1) ,
, ,
(2) , ,
(3) , - 1)
10. ,
, , ,
11. ,
,
-I
(i)
(i)
(ii)
(ii)
(iii)
-
4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART III SEC.4]
(i)
(ii)
(i)
-
(i) -
(ii)
(ii)
(i) -
[ III 4] 5
(ii)
-II
I
-
II
-
,
[ -III/4/ - ]
THE CENTRAL CONSUMER PROTECTION AUTHORITY
NOTIFICATION
New Delhi, the 11th October, 2021
F. No. J-25/6/2020-CCPA. In exercise of the powers conferred by clause (3) of section 13 read
with clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 104 of the Consumer Protection Act, 2019 (35 of 2019), the
Central Consumer Protection Authority, with the previous approval of the Central Government, hereby
makes the following regulations, namely:--
1. Short title and commencement. (1) These regulations may be called the Central Consumer
Protection Authority (Procedure for Engagement of Experts and Professionals) Regulations, 2021.
(2) They shall come into force on the date of their publication in the Official Gazette.
2. Definitions. (1)In these regulations, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a)
(b) ection Authority established under section
10 of the Act;
(c) Chief Commissioner of the Central Authority appointed under
sub section (2) of section 10 of the Act;
(d) ed under sub-section (2) of section 15 of
the Consumer Protection Act, 2019 and includes any Additional, Joint, Deputy or Assistant Directors
General appointed under that section;
(e) ility having special
knowledge of, and experience in the field for which they are to be engaged;
6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART III SEC.4]
(2) Words and expressions used herein but not defined and defined in the Act shall have the same
meaning as assigned to them in the Act.
3. Engagement of experts and professionals. The Central Authority may decide on the number of
experts and professionals to be engaged and accordingly engage such persons in the fields of
consumer rights and welfare, consumer policy, law, medicine, food safety, health, engineering,
product safety, commerce, economics, public affairs, administration or such other disciplines related
to consumer protection, as it may deem fit.
4. Functions of experts and professionals. The experts and professionals engaged by the Central
Authority shall discharge such functions as may be assigned to them by the Chief Commissioner for
assisting the Central Authority.
5. Qualifications, experience and classification of experts and professionals, (1) The experts and
professionals to be engaged by the Central Authority shall be classified on the basis of their
qualifications and experience in the respective fields of specialization as given in Schedule I.
(2) Depending upon the experience in respective discipline or field, a person shall be engaged as an
expert or professional in one of the two levels given in Schedule II.
6. Remuneration payable to experts and professionals. The experts or professionals of different
levels shall be paid a remuneration in accordance with Schedule II.
7. Evaluation of performance. The performance of each expert or professional with reference to the
tasks assigned to them and output delivered by them, shall be reviewed every six months by the
Central Authority.
8. Procedure of selection of experts and professionals. (1) The experts and professionals shall
ordinarily be engaged by the Central Authority on contractual basis for not less than six months and
not more than three years.
(2) The Central Authority shall publish the number of experts and professionals to be engaged, with
details of qualifications and experience required and the remuneration payable, on its official website,
inviting applications for each discipline and level, giving a stipulated last date for the receipt of the
applications for each discipline and level, and may also invite such applications by suitable public
notice.
(3) The Central Authority shall constitute a selection board consisting of such number of eminent
experts, as it deems fit, having special knowledge and experience in the field for which selection is to
be made.
(4) The Central Authority shall scrutinize the applications and prepare lists of eligible candidates for
each discipline and level to be called for interview.
(5) The selection board shall be convened with the approval of the Chief Commissioner for each
discipline and the Central Authority shall notify the date and venue of the interview to the shortlisted
eligible candidates sufficiently in advance.
(6) The recommendations of each selection board regarding engagement for each discipline and level
shall be placed before the Central Authority for its decision.
(7) On approval by the Central Authority, each candidate shall be informed in writing by an offer
letter of engagement giving not less than fifteen days time to accept the offer of engagement.
(8) After receipt of acceptance from the selected candidate, the Central Authority shall issue letter of
engagement to each candidate giving not less than thirty days time to join:
[ III 4] 7
Provided that the joining time may be extended by the Central Authority on being satisfied that such
extension is sought for circumstances beyond the control of the selected candidate.
9. Terms and condition of engagement of experts and professionals. (1) The expert and professional
who have accepted the offer of engagement, before being assigned any work, shall enter into a
contract and such contract shall contain a confidentiality clause and details of the terms and
conditions of engagement.
(2) The terms and conditions of engagement may be modified, in a specific case, if the Central
Authority deems it necessary.
(3) Without prejudice to the legal remedies available to the Central Authority, any breach of the terms
and conditions of the contract executed under sub-regulation (1) shall be considered a sufficient
ground for termination of the engagement made under the said contract and may further debar such
expert or professional from future engagement by the Central Authority.
10. Power to relax. The Central Authority may relax any of the provisions of these regulations as may
be deemed necessary in the discharge of its functions under the Act after recording the reasons for
such relaxations.
11. Interpretation. In the implementation of these regulations, if any doubt or difficulty arises in the
interpretation of any provisions thereof, the same shall be placed before the Central Authority and the
decision of the Central Authority shall be final.
Schedule I
(See regulation 5)
Discipline Qualification Experience
Law Essential (i) Experience in judicial or legal work
in Supreme Court, High Court or
(i) degree of LL.B or equivalent
any other court or in Government
from a recognized University or
or Regulatory Authority or in
Institute in India or abroad,
Tribunal or any other similar
recognized by the Bar Council of
forum, or
India.
(ii) Professor/Reader/Lecturer of Law
(ii) qualified to be registered as
of any recognized University or
an advocate in any State Bar
professional Institute of India or
Council of India in terms of
abroad with specialization in
teaching consumer law, or
Desirable
(iii) Legal Manager or senior position in
Any higher qualification with the Corporate sector having
having with the subject of consumer experience of handling consumer
law or regulatory law. complaints, product liability
actions, class actions, etc. under
consumer law.
Information Essential Worked at senior level positions in
Technology organization or corporation dealing with
Postgraduate degree in Engineering
(Computer Science or Electronic &
management, data visualization, etc.
Communication or Information
Science) from any University or
Institute of India or abroad, duly
recognized in India.
8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [PART III SEC.4]
Desirable
Any higher qualification with
excellent academic record.
Medical Essential Professor or Reader or Lecturer of
Medicine in any recognized University
Master of Science or Doctor of
or professional Institute of India or
Medicine from a University in India
abroad, or a person of eminence in the
or abroad duly recognized by the
medical profession.
Medical Council of India.
Desirable
Any higher qualification with
excellent academic record.
Science Essential (i) Worked at senior level position in
Government organizations or
Postgraduate degree in Pure or
organizations in private sector
Applied sciences from a recognized
dealing with technical and
University of India or abroad.
scientific matters; or
Desirable
(ii) Professor or Reader or Lecturer of
Any higher qualification with sciences in any recognized
excellent academic record. University or professional Institute
of India or abroad.
Economics Essential - (i) Work experience in analysis of
microeconomic problems,
Postgraduate degree in Economics
including International trade,
from either a recognized University
investment, project evaluation and
in India or abroad, with
appraisal, industrial organization,
specialization in Industrial
Industrial economics or economic
Economics or Industrial
regulation including competition
Organization or International Trade
assessment, using quantitative
or Econometrics or Mathematical
economic techniques in
Economics or Quantitative
Government, public sector, private
Economic methods or Law and
sector, non-governmental
Economics.
organizations or regulatory
Desirable authorities or regional or
international or multilateral
(i) consistent high academic
organizations or in universities or
performance.
reputed research institutions; or
(ii) doctoral degree, from a
(ii) Professor or Reader or Lecturer in
reputed University or
any recognised University or
Institution in India or from a
research institution in
University or Institution duly
Microeconomics or Industrial
recognized in India, in
Economics or Industrial
Economics in the area of
Organization or International trade
consumer policy or related
or Econometrics or Mathematical
areas.
Economics or Quantitative
Economic methods or related
subjects.
Business Essential (i) Worked in managerial positions in
marketing and allied divisions at
Management Postgraduate degree or Postgraduate
organizations especially in Fast
diploma in Master of Business
Moving Consumer Goods sector,
Management from a recognized
having adequate knowledge of
University in India or from a
[ III 4] 9
foreign University, duly recognized market surveillance (with focus on
by a competent authority in the e commerce), advertisement
country. policies, demand modeling,
development impact assessment; or
Desirable
(ii) Professor or Reader or Lecturer of
Any higher qualification with
Business Management in any
excellent academic record.
recognized University or
professional Institute of India or
abroad.
Desirable:
Experience in handling consumer related
issues including compliance matters.
Schedule II
(See regulation 5 and 6)
Level of experts and Preferred experience in years Lump sum monthly remuneration
professionals
(1) (2) (3)
Level I Upto three years -cents increase on
completion of each year.
Level II Three to five years -cents increase on
completion of each year.
ANUPAM MISHRA, Commissioner
[ADVT.-III/4/Exty./319/2021-22]
Uploaded by Dte. of Printing at Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-110064
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-110054.
